Copyright (C) 2004- OKTET Labs.

End-User License Agreement (EULA) of Test Environment

This End-User License Agreement ("EULA") is a legal agreement between you and
OKTET Labs.. Our EULA was created by EULA Template for Test Environment.

This EULA agreement governs your acquisition and use of our Test Environment
software ("Software") directly from OKTET Labs. or indirectly through a OKTET
Labs. authorized reseller or distributor (a "Reseller"). Our Privacy Policy
was created by the Privacy Policy Generator.

Please read this EULA agreement carefully before completing the installation
process and using the Test Environment software. It provides a license to use
the Test Environment software and contains warranty information and liability
disclaimers.

If you register for a free trial of the Test Environment software, this EULA
agreement will also govern that trial. By clicking "accept" or installing
and/or using the Test Environment software, you are confirming your
acceptance of the Software and agreeing to become bound by the terms of this
EULA agreement.

If you are entering into this EULA agreement on behalf of a company or other
legal entity, you represent that you have the authority to bind such entity
and its affiliates to these terms and conditions. If you do not have such
authority or if you do not agree with the terms and conditions of this EULA
agreement, do not install or use the Software, and you must not accept this
EULA agreement.

This EULA agreement shall apply only to the Software supplied by OKTET Labs.
herewith regardless of whether other software is referred to or described
herein. The terms also apply to any OKTET Labs. updates, supplements,
Internet-based services, and support services for the Software, unless other
terms accompany those items on delivery. If so, those terms apply.

### License Grant

OKTET Labs. hereby grants you a personal, non-transferable, non-exclusive
licence to use the Test Environment software on your devices in accordance
with the terms of this EULA agreement.

You are permitted to load the Test Environment software (for example a PC,
laptop, mobile or tablet) under your control. You are responsible for
ensuring your device meets the minimum requirements of the Test Environment
software.

You are not permitted to:

Edit, alter, modify, adapt, translate or otherwise change the whole or any
part of the Software nor permit the whole or any part of the Software to be
combined with or become incorporated in any other software, nor decompile,
disassemble or reverse engineer the Software or attempt to do any such things
Reproduce, copy, distribute, resell or otherwise use the Software for any
commercial purpose Allow any third party to use the Software on behalf of or
for the benefit of any third party Use the Software in any way which breaches
any applicable local, national or international law use the Software for any
purpose that OKTET Labs. considers is a breach of this EULA agreement
Intellectual Property and Ownership OKTET Labs. shall at all times retain
ownership of the Software as originally downloaded by you and all subsequent
downloads of the Software by you. The Software (and the copyright, and other
intellectual property rights of whatever nature in the Software, including
any modifications made thereto) are and shall remain the property of OKTET
Labs..

OKTET Labs. reserves the right to grant licences to use the Software to third
parties.

### Termination

This EULA agreement is effective from the date you first use the Software and
shall continue until terminated. You may terminate it at any time upon
written notice to OKTET Labs..

It will also terminate immediately if you fail to comply with any term of
this EULA agreement. Upon such termination, the licenses granted by this EULA
agreement will immediately terminate and you agree to stop all access and use
of the Software. The provisions that by their nature continue and survive
will survive any termination of this EULA agreement.

### Governing Law 

This EULA agreement, and any dispute arising out of or in
connection with this EULA agreement, shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of ru.

Test Environment is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

