# Setup Web server for logs storage

Pretty often testing logs should be shared amoung many developers.
However, human-readable representation takes a lot of disk space
especially when all formats (HTML, JSON, text) are stored for all
available test runs.

Web server (e.g. apache2) plus CGI scripts allow to store compressed
raw logs only and generate everything else upon request.

``te-logs-index.sh`` adds fake entries in addition to regular files
for files which could be generated from availabe raw logs.

``te-logs-error404.sh`` generates requested log file if it is missing.

Generated files may be removed periodically (e.g. in a few days after
creation) to save disk space.

``setup.sh`` should be run with super-user rights to setup log storage.
The scripts supports option `-n` to see commands which the script would
do. The script generates Apache2 configuration snippet to be added to
your configuration.


## Publishing logs

Typically logs are published on a dedicated server and structured in
some way. User should not be aware of the structure. User should
just provide meta data and raw logs in the most compact format.

Script ``publish-logs-unpack.sh`` provides a way to enfornce
recommended structure. It could be used in two ways:
 - check incoming directory for available log files anb publish it;
 - publish specified log files.

It should be wrappeed on your server in a helper script which
enforces options. The wrapper could be added to sudo rules
to be able to run it on behalf of appropriate user.

In incoming directory mode, the script removes processed files
from incoming directory. Just delete or move bad files to
specified directory to be able to process it later.

Input file is always a GNU tar archieve with two mandatory files
(``meta_data.json`` and ``raw_log_bundle.tpxz``) and few other
allowed files. See script for details.


### Synchronous publishing via SSH

If users have SSH login to the logs server, logs should be copied
to the server via SSH/SCP and helper script `publish-incoming-logs`
generated by setup should be executed with path to uploaded logs file
to publish it. If login user differs from logs storage user, the
execution should be done under logs storage owner using `sudo`
(should be tweaked to allow it).


### Asynchronous publishing via SFTP

If you don't want to give users SSH login to the logs server, you still
can setup publishing in asynchronous manner. In this cast users will
have write-only SFTP access and periodic cron job should be used to
pick up and publish logs uploaded via SFTP.

See `te-logs-sftp` file for details.
